Draft: Please do not cite
Everything Old Is New Again:
Lessons from Dodge v. Ford Motor Company
M. Todd Henderson∗
On November 2, 1916, the day after his son Edsel’s wedding,1 Henry Ford
received a copy of the complaint that instigated one of the most famous lawsuits
in the history of American corporate law. The case, Dodge v. Ford Motor
Company,2 was about minority shareholders’ ability to challenge the authority of
the board of directors to make business decisions that were alleged to be serving
interests other than maximizing the value of plaintiffs’ shares. The plaintiffs,
John and Horace Dodge, were not strangers to Henry Ford: they were his longest
and most important business partners, they were fellow board members for over
a decade (1903 to 1913), and they had celebrated together at Edsel’s wedding the
night before. The Dodges, who had recently founded their own firm to compete
with Ford, objected to a decision by the board to withhold special dividends and
spend the millions of dollars to build the world’s largest auto manufacturing
facility. Their claim was that the decision was based on Henry Ford’s
idiosyncratic preferences about doing social good for workers and customers as
opposed to making the most money for shareholders.
The Michigan courts struggled. Ford was emphatic in both his pretrial
comments and his testimony that the decision to build the factory was about
doing “as much good as we can, everywhere, for everybody concerned . . . [a]nd
incidentally to make money.”3 Faced with Ford’s candor about using someone
else’s money to achieve his personal goals, the court ordered the payment of a
large dividend (about $19 million), and enjoined construction of the factory.
The intervention by the court was a radical and outrageous result. Courts
generally do not interfere with business decisions—deciding to build a factory is a
quintessential one—even in the face of allegations that they are not profit-
maximizing decisions. As long as the board considered the issue seriously and
there is some plausible claim that the decision is in the best interests of the firm,
courts defer to the business judgment of management. This test was met here:
regardless of Henry Ford’s rhetoric, expanding manufacturing capacity may
University of Chicago Law School. I am grateful to Douglas Baird and Mark Ramseyer for their
help and to the Sarah Scaife Foundation and the John M. Olin Foundation for research funding.
Ali Beyer provided extremely able research support.
1 There is a division of opinion about the timing of the suit that reflects the various
opinions on the merits of the case. According to one historical account, the suit’s “timing seemed
a calculated insult . . . . They had conversed congenially with the entire Ford family and said
nothing about filing the suit.” See STEVEN WATTS, THE PEOPLE’S TYCOON 255 (2005). Another book
takes a more benign view:
The Dodges had already filed their suit when the invitations to Edsel’s wedding
arrived. They knew that the timing would upset Ford and they originally planned
not to attend, but Edsel’s fiancée, Eleanor Clay had been John Dodge’s neighbor
for six years, and she convinced the brothers to attend.
See Gelderman, Carol “Henry Ford: The Wayward Capitalist” 72 (1989).
2 204 Mich. 459 (1919).
3 See ALLEN NEVINS & F RANK E. HILL , FORD: E XPANSION AND CHALLENGE, 1915-33, at 99-
100 (1957) (quoting interview).